Let's start with submitting.
How can we submit our form and get all the values the user entered?
As mentioned before, this form widget helps us with that but first of all, we need a trigger that actually
leads to that form being submitted and I will actually go with two triggers -
one of them is the done button on the imageUrl because that's the last input here,
so I think it makes sense that hitting enter here would try to submit the entire form and I also want
to have a save button here in the action bar that should also try to submit the form.
Of course, you could also have a button below these inputs here if you wanted that.
So let me first of all add this button here in the appBar, a simple icon button where I use an icon which
is the save icon,
is this icon here and when this gets pressed, then I want to try to save the form and the same for the
soft keyboard, the done button here on the image input here.
Let's add a new method and I'll call that method which doesn't return anything _saveForm,
the name is totally up to you.
saveForm is the method
I want to trigger here
when we press that IconButton,
so I point at saveForm here for onPressed and I want to trigger to _saveForm for my image
input down there
and here, I in the end want to listen to the onFieldSubmitted event which is triggered when the done
button is pressed on the soft keyboard.
There we get the value
though I don't care about that,
so I don't really need to do anything with it
and I then want to trigger saveForm,
without the arrow, _saveForm
of course. Now important,
I'm using an anonymous function here to wrap my _saveForm call instead of just pointing at _saveForm
because onFieldSubmitted expects a function that takes a string value, _saveForm, my function here doesn't
take a string value so I can't point at it, it's the wrong format,
it isn't the kind of function Flutter expects here.
Instead I need a function and hence the anonymous function which takes that input
even if I don't use it
and then in there, I can call _saveForm and now a reference to this anonymous function is passed to
onFieldSubmitted and then Flutter will execute this anonymous function
when we press the done button in the soft keyboard. Then we call saveForm and now of course the
big question is, what happens in _saveForm? Here,
I want to submit my form with the help of the form widget to then get access to all the values.
Now for that, you need a way to interact with the form widget from inside this method,
you want to do something like form.submit or form.save or anything like that.
So how can you get a direct access to that form widget from inside your code?
For that, you can use a global key.
We haven't used a global key before because you need it
very rarely.
You typically need it when you need to interact with a widget from inside your code
as we now need to and that's about it
and mostly, you do that with form widgets and not really that much with other widgets. So hence here, we
add a new property in our state, a property that should hold that global key and I'll name this
_form,
you can name it however you want and you create a global key here by instantiating global key and global
key actually is a generic type where you can add angled brackets to make it clear which kind of data
it will refer to.
It will refer to our form widget and to be precise, global keys can then hook into the state of widgets,
so it will in the end refer to form state, form state is a class which is available because we import
material.dart.
So the global key will allow us to interact with the state behind the form widget
so to say and therefore now we can assign that form key to the form to establish that connection simply
by setting the key argument here to form which is our global key.
Now we can use the form property to interact with the state managed by that form widget and form
is a stateful widget,
it's invisible but behind the scenes, it does indeed work with your form elements here and gives
you easy access to all your form values.
By the way on the form, you can also set other things like auto validation so that after every keystroke,
your validation logic runs,
we haven't added validation logic yet so we can't see that yet but that's something you could set up
as soon as we do add it.
Here you can set up a global onChanged listener which will fire whenever you type something into any
of the inputs in the form and onWillPop is basically a function that will allow you to stop dismissing
this page
if the user is still editing this form. Here, the keys you're setting was important for us and now with
that key, with that form property which has access to this form widget or to the state of the form
widget now, we can reach out to that property, to the form property and call CurrentState.save. Save
is simply a method provided by the state object of the form widget,
so that's basically a method provided by Flutter for you for the form widget which will save that
form
and now what does _saveForm do?
_saveForm will now trigger a method on every text form field which allows you to take the value entered
into the text form field and do with it whatever you want, for example store it into a global map that
collects all text inputs. For that, let's go up to the beginning of our state object again and let's
add another property,
not a final one though which should describe a product and for that, we need to import our product
class from the providers folder and there, the product.dart file because I want to create a new variable,
a new property here and actually I can use the var keyword for that because I will initialize it with
a value which holds my edited product and there I create a new product which initially has an ID
that is null let's say, it has no ID, it has a title which is empty, it has a price which is 0,
it has a description which is empty and it has an imageUrl
which is an empty string. So it's basically an empty product you could say, not technically it's
an object which is totally there but it has empty values.
Now my plan is to update this edited product when saveForm is executed and therefore we call save
on the overall form widget because as I mentioned, this will now execute a function on every text form
field, it will execute the onSaved function and that executes a function then which takes the value
that's currently entered into this input field and then you can do whatever you want with that value
and here for example, you can reach out to your edited product and set this equal to a new product because
you might remember that in the product, all these properties are final, so we can't reassign the value
after a product has been created,
so instead we have to create a new product and override the existing edited product with it and with
that here, we can create a product which takes all the old values of the existing added product and overrides
the one value for which this text form field was responsible.
So here we could set the title is now equal to value right, because that is what was entered into this
text form field. For the other fields like the price, we take the existing editedProduct.price
and for description, the existing editedProduct.description and for the imageUrl, the existing
editedProduct.imageUrl and for ID, well we keep that set to null.
Now of course instead of constantly recreating such a product,
alternatively you could create a new class which you only use for submitting your form data which you
could also name product or name differently which has mutable, so editable properties so that you
don't have to recreate this all over again but you can simply edit the properties in the existing
object.
That would be an alternative, here
I'll go with the product we have which is immutable and therefore I'm also fine with recreating this.
So back to the edit product screen.
This is my onSaved method for the title,
we can now simply copy that
to also add it for the price and there of course, we don't initialize the title with the value but instead
we keep that to editedProduct.title but the price here is now set to value and now the problem
is price expects a number but value is always a string,
well we simply have to parse that to a number simply by calling double.parse value and add a comma here,
this will convert this to a double.
Now with that, we can move on to the description,
also add onSaved there, for the title we keep the editedProduct.title of course, for the price
we keep the editedProduct.price but for the description, we now take the value that was entered and
with that,
let's move on to our
imageUrl down there.
Here we also add onSaved, we keep editedProduct.title here, we keep the price, we keep the description
but for the imageUrl we use that value and please keep in mind right now we're not validating the
user input, so we could totally submit invalid input but that will soon change.
So with that, we're constantly creating a new product where we keep the data from the other inputs and
simply add the data of this input, so that by the end,
we have editedProduct which holds a product where all the properties should be filled with the inputs
from our various inputs here in our widget tree.
So after calling save here, in the end at some point, edited product here should have the title we entered,
should have the description and so on
so let's check this here real quick by printing the description, price and also the imageUrl.
And with that I'd say let's save this, reload that page and enter test, maybe a price of
12.99,
this is a test and then here,
time for a URL again.
So simply paste it in again, like this
and now we can submit either by pressing the done button here on the imageUrl or by pressing the save
button up there.
If I press save here, you indeed see in the log test,
this is a test, the price and the URL. So submitting and saving the data worked, if I try that checkmark here,
well we have the same output, so this also worked.
So with that, we can submit our form but of course as I mentioned, we're not validating the input at all
and that's of course something we want to do to avoid that users can also submit the form without having
entered a title for example, which at the moment is possible.